DEVX-2467: Create consumer lag client use case (#948)
confluentinc/examples: ccloud-monitoring/docs/consumer-scenarios/increasing-consumer-lag.rst

.. _ccloud-monitoring-consumer-increasing-consumer-lag:

Increasing Consumer Lag
***********************

Consumer lag is a tremendous performance indicator. It tells you the offset difference between the
producer's last produced message and the consumer group's last commit. If you are unfamiliar with
consumer groups or concepts like committing offsets, please refer to this
`Kafka Consumer documentation <https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/clients/consumer.html>`__.

A large consumer lag, or a quickly growing lag, indicates that the consumer is not able to keep up with
the volume of messages on a topic.

This scenario will look at |ccloud| metrics from the Metrics API, `kafka-lag-exporter <https://github.com/lightbend/kafka-lag-exporter>`__ metrics, and
client metrics from the client application’s MBean object ``kafka.consumer:type=consumer-fetch-manager-metrics,client-id=<client_id>``.

> Introduce failure scenario

Reviewer: It's not really a *failure* scenario, it might be misleading to call it that.

Author: I would argue that teams do have SLAs to process the latest messages within a period of time, so having a lag (if big enough) would could cause you to break that SLA. Imagine going from 25 second delays to 12 minute delays (possible if consumer code is tweaked), that could be a failure to meet your SLA of processing messages within a 30 second delay. 
It's definitely true that this lag introduced here isn't that massive. I can add a back story in the intro about how this could turn into a failure scenario but with resource restrictions, we will show a "degraded state" (barely). Or change the title to "Introduce degraded state scenario" (imo this is still misleading given the small lag that is introduced).

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> #. By default 2 consumers and 1 producer are running. Adjust that to 1 consumer and 5 producers in order to show an increase in consumer lag.

Reviewer: Just curious, why is the default 2 consumers?  Why isn't it 1 consumer?  If each consumer-related scenario can scale the number of consumers as it needs to, would it make sense (for footprint and ease of explaining) to make the default 1 consumer?  (Plus, the unique dashboard view of consumer rebalances could be moved to a new scenario)

Author: Great point. Now that the docker-compose has clients in state to scale with an easy command, I should probably remove the extra consumer. 
Moments like these are why I love PRs.

Author: :sonic_waiting: I need to retake screenshots of the scenario, actively working on it.

Author: updated the screenshots in https://github.com/confluentinc/examples/pull/948/commits/9b6e040d6ad2773e51a2e0a49e50b944549ac902

> #. By default 2 consumers and 1 producer are running. Adjust that to 1 consumer and 5 producers in order to show an increase in consumer lag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. By default 2 consumers and 1 producer are running. Adjust that to 1 consumer and 5 producers in order to force the condition where the consumer cannot keep up with the rate of messages being produced, which will cause an increase in consumer lag.
```

   The container scaling can be done with the command below:

   .. code-block:: bash

>       docker-compose up -d --scale consumer=1 --scale producer=5

Reviewer: If running this without setting the `EXPORT` commands printed at the end of the start script, the output is:

```
[8:08:37] ~/git/examples/ccloud-monitoring(DEVX-2467) ✗: docker-compose up -d --scale consumer=1 --scale producer=5
WARNING: The METRICS_API_KEY variable is not set. Defaulting to a blank string.
WARNING: The METRICS_API_SECRET variable is not set. Defaulting to a blank string.
WARNING: The CLOUD_CLUSTER variable is not set. Defaulting to a blank string.
WARNING: The CONFIG_FILE variable is not set. Defaulting to a blank string.
WARNING: The BOOTSTRAP_SERVERS variable is not set. Defaulting to a blank string.
WARNING: The SASL_JAAS_CONFIG variable is not set. Defaulting to a blank string.
Recreating kafka-lag-exporter ... 
Recreating ccloud-exporter    ... 
node-exporter is up-to-date
Recreating kafka-lag-exporter                      ... done
Recreating ccloud-exporter                         ... done
Stopping and removing ccloud-monitoring_consumer_2 ... done
Recreating ccloud-monitoring_producer_1            ... done
Recreating ccloud-monitoring_consumer_1            ... done
Creating ccloud-monitoring_producer_2              ... done
Creating ccloud-monitoring_producer_3              ... done
Creating ccloud-monitoring_producer_4              ... done
Creating ccloud-monitoring_producer_5              ... done
```

- So should those export statements be executed by the user?  (if yes, that was one advantage of adding those to a `.env` file)
- Should the clients not have dependencies on the monitoring docker containers?  (so they don't get updated when scaling up/down)

Author: A .env file would resolve the problem when rebringing up all the containers during docker-compoes --scale but doesn't resolve why all of the containers are being evaluated to be brought up. 
Currently the only dependencies are the clients on prometheus + grafana (u right, this ain't needed). Given that, it doesn't make sense that kafka-lag-exporter, node-exporter, ccloud-exporter are recreated here. I'm digging into this.

Author: I removed the client dependencies in commit https://github.com/confluentinc/examples/pull/948/commits/9b6e040d6ad2773e51a2e0a49e50b944549ac902 but still see all of the containers being evaluated for "updates" when scaling. A brief look into `docker-compose up --scale` this morning didn't yield any obvious ways to circumvent this. I added an "export" of the necessary env vars to a `.env` file so that these variables are set when a --scale command is run.

      node-exporter is up-to-date
      grafana is up-to-date
      prometheus is up-to-date
      Stopping and removing ccloud-monitoring_consumer_2 ... done
      Starting ccloud-monitoring_producer_1              ... done
      Creating ccloud-monitoring_producer_2              ... done
      Creating ccloud-monitoring_producer_3              ... done
      Creating ccloud-monitoring_producer_4              ... done
      Creating ccloud-monitoring_producer_5              ... done
      Starting ccloud-monitoring_consumer_1              ... done

Diagnose the problem
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

#. Open `Grafana <localhost:3000>`__ and login with the username ``admin`` and password ``password``.

#. Navigate to the ``Consumer Client Metrics`` dashboard. Wait 2 minutes and then observe:

   - ``Rebalance rate`` (``rebalance-rate-per-hour``) has a bump, indicating that the consumer group ``demo-cloud-monitoring-1`` underwent a rebalance, which is to be expected when a consumer leaves the group.

   |Consumer Rebalance Bump|

   - An upward trend in ``Consumer group lag in records``.  ``Consumer group lag in seconds`` will have a less dramatic increase.

>      Both indicating that the producer is creating more messages than the consumer can fetch in a timely manner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     Both indicate that the producer is creating more messages than the consumer can fetch in a timely manner.
```

     These metrics are derived from the ``kafka-lag-exporter`` container.

>      `kafka-lag-exporter <https://github.com/lightbend/kafka-lag-exporter>`__ is a scala open source project that collects data about consumer groups and presents them in a Prometheus scrapable format.

Reviewer: Great explanation!  For consideration, move to the intro?

Author: Are you sure? Earlier it seemed like you wanted an explanation of this sort here (https://github.com/confluentinc/examples/pull/948#discussion_r582325128).

Reviewer: My leaning:

- In the introduction it could introduce the Kafka Lag Exporter overall (with the longer explanation to be able to answer what is Kafka Lag Exporter
- In this step it could say that consumer lag is derived from ``kafka-lag-exporter``.  User by this point should already know what Kafka Lag Exporter is, you are just reminding them that this metric. is derived from that

Author: I moved the kafka-lag-exporter info to the top in commit https://github.com/confluentinc/examples/pull/948/commits/9b6e040d6ad2773e51a2e0a49e50b944549ac902

   |Consumer Lag|

   - An increase in ``Fetch request rate`` (``fetch-total``) and ``Fetch size avg`` (``fetch-size-avg``) in the ``Consumer Fetch Metrics`` tab, indicating the consumer is fetching more often and larger batches.

   |Consumer Fetch Increase|

>    - All of the graphs in the ``Throughput`` are indicating the consumer is processing more bytes/records.

Reviewer: For this point and the previous point, while they are true, it doesn't necessarily mean that the consumer lag would necessarily increase (especially if the consumer is tuned/resources properly).  Would it make sense to make a note of this?

Author: I added a note. 
![Screen Shot 2021-02-25 at 10 58 35 AM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/12937975/109196992-ab9e3900-7759-11eb-89fe-abc10ad489ae.png)

   |Consumer Throughput Increase|

> #. Another view of consumer lag can be found in |ccloud|. Open the UI, navigate to the "Consumers" section and click on the ``demo-cloud-monitoring-1`` consumer group.

Reviewer: Great tie in!

   This page will update periodically, within two minutes you should see a steady increase is the offset lag.

   |Confluent Cloud Consumer Lag|

>    This provides a snapshot in time, but it lacks of historical context that the ``Consumer Client Metrics`` dashboard provides.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This provides a snapshot in time, but it lacks the historical view that the ``Consumer Client Metrics`` dashboard provides.
```

Author: resolved in commit https://github.com/confluentinc/examples/pull/948/commits/9b6e040d6ad2773e51a2e0a49e50b944549ac902
